Earth will hit 1.5°C climate limit within 20 years, says IPCC report.

Earth is expected to hit the critical threshold of 1.5°C warming due to climate change within the next 20 years, regardless of how deeply global governments cut greenhouse gas emissions under all five scenarios considered by a landmark scientific report.

OUR world is expected to hit the critical threshold of 1.5°C of warming due to climate change within the next 20 years under all five scenarios considered by a landmark report. 
That is regardless of how deeply we cut greenhouse gas emissions.

In a summary of the state of climate science, agreed by 195 countries and published on 9 August, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) said humanity's role in driving climate change was "unequivocal", an upgrade on the language of "clear" used eight years ago.

Researchers said each of the past four decades has been warmer than any decade since 1850, and warned of more extreme weather to come. 
This year has already seen deadly floods, heatwaves and wildfires, with Greece battling major blazes as the report came out. 
"Climate change is not a problem of the future, it's here and now," says Friederike Otto at the University of Oxford, a lead IPCC author.

In the worst of five scenarios detailing how future global emissions may play out, the world faces a catastrophic 4.4°C average temperature rise by 2100, the IPCC concluded. 
In all five scenarios, in the next two decades warming reaches or exceeds the 1.5°C goal of the 2015 Paris Agreement, which also set a weaker goal of holding warming to 2°C.

However, the good news is the most ambitious scenario – with emissions cut to net zero and carbon sucked out of the air – would see warming fall back to 1.4°C by 2100. 
"The 1.5°C or 2°C goals, they are not cliff edges," says Ed Hawkins at the University of Reading, UK, an author on the IPCC report. 
"We don't fall off a cliff if we go over those thresholds. Every bit of warming matters."

The report has a much greater focus than past IPCC assessments on "low likelihood", but possibly disastrous, outcomes, which become more likely with more warming. 
"Abrupt responses and tipping points of the climate system, such as strongly increased Antarctic ice sheet melt and forest dieback, cannot be ruled out," the authors said. 
New research on how ice sheets may collapse in the highest emissions scenario shows average sea level rise could be as much as 1.88 metres by 2100, near double that envisaged previously.

Some changes, such as ocean acidification, will be irreversible for centuries to millennia regardless of how societies cut emissions in coming years. 
"But the more we limit warming, the more we can slow down those [long-term] changes," says Tamsin Edwards, an IPCC author based at King's College London.

"It will be our activities and choices that will determine where we end up over the next decades and centuries," says Joeri Rogelj of Imperial College London, an IPCC author. 
Humanity currently emits around 40 billion tonnes of carbon dioxide a year. 
That needs to fall to around 5 billion by 2050 for the very low emission scenario. 
Under an intermediate scenario, emissions would be similar to today by mid-century. 
In the very high scenario, emissions would be about double today's level by 2050.

Rogelj says, given that not all government pledges on climate action have been translated to policy, we are probably currently between the intermediate and high emissions scenarios. 
Those would lead to an estimated 2.7°C and 3.6°C of warming, respectively.

Changing track to get on the pathway of the very low emissions scenario – the only one where warming later this century falls back to below 1.5°C – will be a key task for nearly 200 countries that are meeting at the COP26 climate summit in Glasgow, UK, this November.

Piers Forster at the University of Leeds, UK, an IPCC author, says the report robustly shows that getting to net-zero emissions can stabilise temperatures. 
"The good news is we can be very certain near-term [emissions] reductions can really reduce the rate of unprecedented warming," he says.

The report – the Physical Science Basis Summary for Policymakers, written by Working Group I of the IPCC – provides higher confidence levels for many statements made in the equivalent 2013 report, mainly due to drawing on multiple lines of evidence by combining models with observations and a better understanding of the physical processes.
